.. _gallilean-relativity:

===================
Galilean Relativity
===================

Most people have some vague idea of Einsteinian Special and General
Relativity, with variable clock rates, shortening in the direction of
motion, and many other effects previously unthinkable. Not so many have
heard of the previous version of Relativity, which was almost equally
unthinkable in its time. In his theory of mechanics and of uniform
gravity, Galileo noticed the fact that we cannot feel uniform velocity,
and we cannot detect it without observing something outside our frame of
reference. He used the examples of ships sailing on smooth water, and a
rider on a horse. In either case, if you drop a ball, it lands at your
feet, even though your feet have moved some distance forward while it
fell. If you drop it from the top of the mast of a ship, it lands at the
bottom of the mast in the same way. If you throw a ball straight up, it
comes down into your hand. You can try this in a car, a bus, a train, or
an airplane.

Before Galileo, Aristotelean physics denied these possibilities. The
claim was that you could feel motion directly, as you would in a cart on
a bumpy road. In particular, the Earth could not be rotating according
to this view, nor could it be revolving in an orbit around the sun,
because in either case we would be left behind or subjected to immense
winds. It turns out that in a cart, you can feel side-to-side or
up-and-down forces, but (in constant forward motion) no force forward or
back. To the contrary. When the cart starts up, we are thrown backwards,
as it seems to us, until we accelerate to match the speed of the cart,
and similarly we can feel that we are being thrown forward when the cart
stops. No, in fact we just continue moving forward for a moment until a
backward force can slow us down. Again, you can observe this on any
vehicle with significant acceleration and deceleration, although it
often happens that a passenger on a train cannot tell whether it is this
train or the train on the next track that has just started moving when
the start is gentle enough.

An extremely important instance of Galilean relativity is our view of
falling objects. The person dropping an object from the top of a mast on
a ship sees the object fall straight down, but an observer on shore sees
it moving forward with the ship. What is the curve that that falling
object takes? Is it different if you drop it from a moving vantage point
such as the ship's mast, or throw it sideways from the nearly motionless
top floor of the Leaning Tower of Pisa? We can do the experiment at home
without needing ship or tower, and we can also get the Turtle to build
us a model. The next time you watch a sport played with a ball (soccer,
football, tennis, lacrosse, water polo,â€¦) see if you can trace the curve
that it takes.

If we have prepared children with experience with a variety of shapes,
specifically including the shapes that a flashlight can create on a flat
wall (conic sections) children should recognize these shapes as
parabolas.

You or a child can easily do a variety of experiments to confirm
Galileo's insight into his observations. Here is one of the best, which
I saw done in my childhood. Get a yard or meter stick and two coins. If
you do this over carpet, use coins big enough so that you can hear them
land even across the room. Put a coin on each end of the ruler, and
balance the ruler in the middle. Strike one end of the ruler so that it
turns in a horizontal plane, and so that one coin starts to move
horizontally. The other end of the ruler should slide out from under the
second coin so that it drops straight down. What do you hear? What does
that mean? This verifies what you see in the TA model, where dots in the
line straight down and dots in the parabola are at the same heights.
